Becoming Lead on an Existing Project
------------------------------------

:construction: UNDER CONSTRUCTION :construction:

Mastering the contribution flow; handling transition from previous lead; working well with the existing team; encouraging new members to contribute



Becoming the new lead on an existing project can be challenging.  Looking back at the times I've taken over the reigns on an existing project or team I feel like I have usually screwed up various things.  In each case I believe I've managed to do right by the team/project in terms of long term success, but it wasn't necessarily a pleasant experience and I often find myself looking back and thinking about how I could have managed things differently in order to reduce the amount of conflict involved.

Taking over a project when the previous maintainers have pretty much left the project and their has been little activity in many months is possibly the situation with the least conflict, although even then there may be challenges.  People get involved in open source projects for all sorts of reasons, but in many projects people will have sweated and struggled over getting things working a certain way and may be very sensitive to any perceived criticism over the way they have things set up.  Everybody has different expectations about what is an acceptable way to behave.  Within a given culture there are likely groups of people who tend to agree more or less what is acceptable, but open source is generally open to the entire world and so projects may well have involved people from many different cultures and backgrounds.

Sometimes we are shocked to find that something we said or did was not as innocuous as we originally thought and in fact close family members, neighbours or other local community members might think otherwise.  This situation is amplified in global open source communities.  And then where does the onus lie?  Is it the responsibility of a new project manager to avoid saying or doing anything that might offend current or previous members of the community they are joining?  Or conversely is it the responsibility of the existing members to accept calmly the actions of a new project manager?  Of course this conundrum is not restricted to taking over a new project; it is faced whenever a new team member joins, or even in any interaction between existing team members.  Is the responsibility with those who are taking actions or those who are responding to them?

Naturally it seems that there must be shared responsibility.  It can't be all on one party or another.  The contention can then become about who has more responsibility.  It does seem reasonable that those with more experience or "seniority" in some other form should be taking more responsibility to ensure that relationships are running smoothly, but I'm not aware of any legislation that takes into account exactly what's going on in everybody's lives and backgrounds that allows us to apportion responsibility in any perfectly coherent fashion.

To the extent that one is not completely single-minded and indifferent to how others react to our determined pursuit of a particular objective, it stands to reason that we might spend some time reflecting on how others respond to the actions we take when we assume a new role, particularly one with associated seniority or responsibility such as becoming a project manager.  Relationships are critical in effectively working as part of a team in all sorts of situations; and I would argue they are even more important in open source projects where the members of the community are volunteers and are giving up free time that they might otherwise spend relaxing.  Irritations with fellow team members at work can be catastrophic if they build up, but if you're getting a good salary and accept that you don't have to be best friend with everyone at work, you can probably brush aside some minor irritations.  Conversely when you are working on an open source project that's not helping support your lifestyle and you are doing for fun and learning in your spare time, you are likely to find conflict and irritation extremely demotivating, to the point that you take yourself elsewhere.

Looking back I think the key mistakes I made when taking over the reigns on an existing project has been to bring in the latest techniques and strategies that I had been enjoying on previous projects.  Putting myself back into my frame of mind at the time, I was excited about these techniques and strategies that seemed to work well in other places, or simply just made sense to me as evolutions of previous practices I had enjoyed.  To be specific things like:

* Choice of Project tracking software (e.g. Waffle vs Trello vs Pivotal Tracker)
* Versioning system branch naming conventions
* Project contribution technique (e.g. pull request sizes)
* Testing strategies (e.g. pure TDD)
* Documentation consistencies
* Meeting management style (e.g. chairperson vs round table)

In my states of mind at the time I was enamoured with a particular technique and I don't believe I was thinking about the techniques in terms of whether others thought they were a good idea or not.  At the time it was almost as if I couldn't conceive of their being multiple different approaches that could be each as good as each other, or at least where the difference was inconsequential.  I was wrapped up in the idea that there was a best practice that everyone was pushing towards together.  If, say, pure TDD was the best practice then what possible complaint could anyone have about adopting it.  It's not so much that I was trying to ignore what other people thought; it was that I was childishly assuming that everyone was in approximately the same mental space as me.  Or at least if they weren't then they soon would be.

Looking back it seems hopelessly naieve, or if I'm more charitable that I was just very focused in pursuit of what I assumed was everyone's shared goal of all adopting the best practice that would maxmimse our efficiency as a team.  Maybe I am still hopelessly naieve and in a few years I'll need to completely revise my mental model again, but where I am now I perceive that in any exising team there are ways of doing things that are comfortable.  Any proposed change can be seen as a burden.  If one would like to be percieved as someone who cares about the team and the effort that people have been putting in previously, then it follows that the first thing to do is NOT to propose a series of changes, but to spend some time investigating what everyone currently thinks.

Of course I can't rule out that there are situations in which a team or existing project is just waiting for someone to say, hey let's do X, and it turns out that everyone has just been waiting for the opportunity to do X and will embrace anyone who comes along and suggests it.  I think the reality of most teams (or communities, or collections of individuals) is that there will be variation in terms of what needs to change, or indeed where there are problems.  Indeed depending on the individual they may not have a clear sense of specifics, but just a general sense of unease about some things.  There are so many different ways to think and nobody has privileged access into understanding perfectly how anyone else thinks.  We have our own internal thoughts and mental dialogue as a model for what might be going on in other people's heads.  One step, that might be forward, is the idea that the internals of other people's minds will differ in some ways to that of our own.   Beyond that is starting to imagine the range of different thinking and feeling styles that all the different people in the world might have.  We can never know them precisely, but talking to more people, seeing different reactions in various situations can lead us to imagine that range.

So taking over a team it seems expedient to create a space in which to receive information from existing team members.  Something I note is that people can express very different opinions depending on whether you are interacting with them alone (and in which medium) or with them in a group setting where various subsets of other people may be able to perceive what they are saying and/or contribute to the discussion.  There's also the danger in both more personal and group settings of asking too many questions, or continuing the conversation to the point of discomfort on the part of the other person or some subset of the members of the group.   It seems to me that preparing to take over an existing team or project one should try to get the balance right between gathering thoughts and feelings from the existing team in a friendly fashion, and pumping everyone for information.

In some ways the real trick to human interaction seems to be reading the signs of discomfort on the parts of those you are interacting with.  For those who are rather wrapped up in their own thought processes it can be easy to miss the signals that others might think are obvious, and my sense is that the majority of people are uncomfortable if it seems they have to give additional feedback beyond what they think should be sufficient.  Perhaps one definition of friend is those people who are able to read our signals so as not to irritate us beyond breaking point ...

So canvas the team, gather information and paint a picture of where the project is.  Find some way to succinctly reflect this back to the team, e.g. an image, diagram, short text, short video to show the results of the information gathering, and see how the group reacts to you reflecting their current status back to them.  Try to find out what changes they would like to see so that when changes are made it's possible to go with the grain of direction the group was already inclined in.  I think that this is all a critical trust building exercise where you show all the other project participants that they can trust you to listen to what they have to say, without demanding too much information.  That you have the social skills and self-awareness to avoid the extremes of ignoring their opinions or pumping them for information beyond their comfort zone, or try to convince them that their opinions are flawed.  That you gather input from everyone before a decision; that you avoid excessive debate that many find uncomfortable, and that you can be trusted to take the lead.

There may well be charistmatic leaders and managers who can jump into a group, raise a standard, get folks fired up and immediately take the entire team in the direction of their choosing; but I've never succeeded at it, or seen anyone do it well without using some variation of the technique I'm describing above.   Of course this approach is no guarantee of success or of avoiding conflict, which I don't think anyone can ever guarantee.  My current feeling is softly softly, gather information, reflect, take baby steps; but who knows maybe another five years of experiences will have me completely changing my tune again.
