Keeping Pace with a Project
---------------------------

:construction: UNDER CONSTRUCTION :construction:

Letting the team know what you’re working on; avoiding duplicated work; voting on stories; handling bugs and chores; getting contributions accepted

One of the things you can do to really help the rest of the project team is to only commit to what you can realistically accomplish.  Doing this is rather hard.  Many of us aspire to doing more, more for our health, more for our learning, more for charity.  In my experience of human beings the majority of them will say things like:

"Yes, I'll work on that feature"
"I'll do that next week"
"Ah, I'm a bit busy till the end of the month, but I'll definitely do it next month"

In a paid work environment repeatedly reneging on your commitments can lead to losing your job, but in the volunteer open source world there are not such serious consequences for the individual so it seems people say that they will do things with much less commitment to following through.  Or, well, they may have deep committment to doing what they say they are planning to do at the time they say they are going to do it, but when it comes to the crunch a day, a week or a month later, the reality is that many people will just not do what they said they would, and furthermore that they will just not send any message to indicate that they haven't been able to do it.

Occasionally I will meet remarkable people who even in a volunteer situation will do what they say they'll do, or at the very least get in touch beforehand and apologise that they weren't able to do what they said they were going to do.  Would that everyone was like this.

I can't be too critical of people who do what they say they will do as I've been guilty of it myself in the past, although these days I strive not to make committments I can't keep and to apologise in advance if it turns out I can't do the thing I said I would.  For the person running an open source project that relies on volunteer contributions the committment issue is a serious one.  For example, you have a feature that needs to get worked on.  It's not high priority at the moment, and it's not too complicated - a good possibility for a new or occasional contributor to work on.  You suggest it to someone, or mention it when someone is asking for things to work on, and they start work.

The contributor might do a little or a lot of the feature and submit a work in progress pull request, or even a final pull request.  There's a whole series of states that the feature can end up in.  Clearly the ideal for the project is that a clean mergeable pull request is in place that fixes the issue, addresses the feature and goes with the grain of the rest of the system, and includes all the required components you've put in your contributing instructions, e.g. tests, formatting etc.

However, more often than not they'll be something else that needs to be done before the work can be safely merged in.  If that thing is small that's no big deal and services such as GitHub are making it increasingly easy for project managers to make small tweaks to submissions.  The real problem for the project arises when there are non-trivial changes still required.  The contribution can remain in a zombie state waiting for further attention from the original contributor.  Sometimes there's a happy ending and the contributor finishes up the work, but often it can be left hanging.

Now the project manager is in a quandry.  Clearly it's polite to reach out to the original contributor and check if they are still working on it.  That might be through a flagging them in GitHub (which folks new to GitHub might not notice), or via other media, e.g. email, slack, IM etc.  Sometimes the contributor will reply and sometimes they won't.  There's then the question for the project manager of how long it is polite to wait for a reply.  Common decency suggests that one should not bombard a volunteer contributor with requests for updates on their status; that seems unlikely to produce positive responses (*).  A reply may of course come in time, and usually the reply is an apology and a committment to get to the issue soon.  Rarely does the person indicate that they just don't have time.  Perhaps because people sense that saying something negative might lead to conflict, which is something many people like to avoid.

The particular difficulty for the project manager is that the whole time this is going on, the contributor is effectively blocking others from working on the feature.  Not in an aggressive sense, but amongst polite contributors the sense that someone else is working on something often means that it will be left until that person gets back.  What might have started as a low-priority feature may now become important.  How does one navigate the social setting here?

As a project manager I would implore contributors to avoid over-committing themselves; and also to make a point of checking back in with the project manager early and honestly to indicate that they can't keep committments.  This isn't restricted to open source projects by any means, but pervades many aspects of life.  Perhaps I'm deluding myself, but as a project manager I really do absolutely love folks being direct and honest with me about their committments.  I have no strong expectations that a feature will be finished, and will happily close the pull request and send the ticket to the backlog so that it can be picked up by someone else.  

My working hypothesis is that people vary in their levels of organisation and there is greater pressure to be more organised for those things that are directly supporting their lifestyle, e.g. their paying jobs and relationships with immediate family etc.  That's exactly as it should be, but if you're hoping to contribute to a project and minimize any drain you might make on the project resources my sense is that communicating proactively and honestly about your intentions with the project manager will be very much appreciated.

The difficulty of course is that even mentioning that one's contribution might be a drain on the project's resources will be sufficient to put some people off contributing at all.  When many are not so confident of their abilities, are firmly in a "learning" mode, and have a fear that they might break something, it takes little to knock one's motivation to contribute something publicly that might also be assessed publicly.

I also sense that we suffer a little from the hangover of traditional education where we learn to work independently, in private, and are encouraged to keep trying to solve problems individually.  From the perspective of the project and the project manager, the last thing we want is for contributors to be struggling with problems by themselves.  I strongly sense that many contributors would like to be able to contribute without having to make any contact with the rest of the project team.  They'd like to be able to grab an issue in private, work out whether they think they can handle it and then perhaps submit a solution.

From the project and team perspective we'd love everyone to get involved in a discussion of the issue they want to work on in order to be able to flag aspects of the issue that maybe didn't make it into the ticket.  Clearly the team should put every effort into making the issue descriptions as comprehensive as possible, but sometimes there is recently changed info like who has started working on a related issue that it's difficult to discover unless you start a conversation with the rest of the team.  In the ideal world (perhaps) all of this information could be surfaced through the project management systems without requiring any human interaction. 

There are perhaps some learning benefits from wrestling with a problem alone, but when new contributors do this my sense is that they often become disheartened and dispirited.  Perhaps I'm not hearing about all the great individual triumphs working through the latest gnarly testing, devops, git issue they are having.  From the point of view of moving the project forward we don't really care how problems are solved, we just want them solved by the quickest and most efficient means possible.

Switching to "in-context" learning involves a change in style from what we experience in traditional education.  There are always more problems to solve that will require individual brain power and provide ample learning experiences.  There's not much benefit to the project from re-inventing the wheel when someone else has a wheel ready to help you with.  Perhaps your learning is a higher priority than the project, but then work on a non-project learning setup.  Working with a project is about learning how to do what's most effective for the project, learning how to operate effectively as a team.



(*) although who knows, maybe what people really want is tough love? :-)
